Medical Expense Data Analysis and Predictive Modeling
================
author: Karanpal Singh, Sreejith Munthikodu, Sirine Chahma </br>
2020/01/24

# Summary

In this project, we attemps to build a regression model that will help
us predict the medical expenses of a person regarding some information
about this person (age, sex, number of children, if the person smokes
and the region where the person is from). After trying different types
of regressors (linear regression, decision tree regressor, knn
regression, random forest regression and SVR), we found out that the
decision tree regressor ended up being the best model regarding to our
data. Our final regressor had satisfying results on an unseen data set,
with a ![R^2](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?R%5E2 "R^2") score of
0.826 on our test data set.

# Introduction

In this project, we attempt to build a predictive model that will answer
the following question : “Given a person’s information, what would be
his/her predicted medical expenses?”. Ansewering this question can be
important for insurance compagnies who wants to evaluate the risk to
insure a certain person regarding to his/her possible medical expenses.

We also wanted to figure out if there is a significant difference of
expenses between smokers and non-smokers, and between males and females.
Therefore, we led two inferential studies asside in order to find an
aswer to those questions.

# Methods

## Data

The Data we are using for this analysis is used in the book Machine
Learning with R by Brett Lantz(Lantz 2013); which is a book that
provides an introduction to machine learning using R. All of these
datasets are in the public domain. The data explain the cost of a small
sample of USA population Medical Insurance Cost based on attributes like
age, sex, number of children etc. Additional information about this data
can be found
[here](https://gist.github.com/meperezcuello/82a9f1c1c473d6585e750ad2e3c05a41).

We didn’t have to clean this data because there were no outliers or
missing values, as described in
[this](https://github.com/UBC-MDS/DSCI_522_group_401/blob/master/notebooks/EDA.ipynb)
jupyter notebook.

## Exploratory analysis on the training data set

To understand the nature of predictors with respect to `Medical
Expenses` we will perform Exploratory Data Analysis and we will try to
understand if there are some intresting behaviours.

##### 1\. Let’s see how `Medical Expenses` are changing with `Age`

<html>

<img src = '../../reports/figures/1.Expenses_VS_Age.png'>

</html>

It can be observed that `Medical Expense` of people is increasing, as
`Age`
increases.

##### 2\. Let’s see how `Medical Expenses` are changing with `BMI (Body Mass Index)`

<html>

<img src = '../../reports/figures/2.Expenses_VS_BMI.png'>

</html>

The highest expenses seem to occur for people who have a higher
BMI.

##### 3\. Let’s see how much money males and females spending on medical treatments between 18-64 Years

<html>

<img src = '../../reports/figures/3.Expenses_VS_Gender.png'>

</html>

The expenses seem to grow with age for both males and females. It looks
like Males in their **20’s & 60’s** tend to pay more on their `Medical
Expenses` than Females. Females in their **40’s** are paying more than
Males on their `Medical
Expenses`.

##### 4\. Let’s see how `Smokers` and `Non-Smokers` are spending on medical treatments between 18-64 Years

We expect expenditures by smokers should be higher than the non smokers.

<html>

<img src = '../../reports/figures/4.Expenses_VS_Smoker.png'>

</html>

**Interesting\!\!\!** - As expected, Health expenses of smokers are a
lot higher than the one of non-smokers.

##### 5\. Let’s see how `BMI` is changing with Age for Males and Females

We are expecting both male and females have usual `BMI`.

<html>

<img src = '../../reports/figures/5.BMI_VS_AGE.png'>

</html>

The `BMI` doesn’t seem to vary depending on the age nor the sex.

##### 6\. Let’s see the Male & Female Expenses Over BMI

<html>

<img src = '../../reports/figures/6.EXP_VS_BMI.png'>

</html>

The highest expenses seem to occur for people from both genders who have
a BMI that is higher than 34.

# Answering the Inferential Research Questions

Now, from above Exploratory Data Analysis we are interested in following
two questions:

  - Is there a significant difference of expenses between smokers and
    non-smokers?
  - Is there a significant difference of expenses between males and
    females?

<br>

##### 1\. Is there a significant difference of expenses between smokers and non-smokers?

  
![H\_0: \\mu\_{Smokers} =
\\mu\_{Non-Smokers}](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?H_0%3A%20%5Cmu_%7BSmokers%7D%20%3D%20%5Cmu_%7BNon-Smokers%7D
"H_0: \\mu_{Smokers} = \\mu_{Non-Smokers}")  
  
![H\_1: \\mu\_{Smokers} \\neq
\\mu\_{Non-Smokers}](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?H_1%3A%20%5Cmu_%7BSmokers%7D%20%5Cneq%20%5Cmu_%7BNon-Smokers%7D
"H_1: \\mu_{Smokers} \\neq \\mu_{Non-Smokers}")  

Our Null hypothesis states that mean expenses of smokers is equal to
mean expenses of non-smokers and Alternate hypothesis states that there
is a significant difference between these two quantities. We have used
t-test to compare mean of two groups and test results are as following:

<table>

<thead>

<tr>

<th style="text-align:right;">

estimate

</th>

<th style="text-align:right;">

estimate1

</th>

<th style="text-align:right;">

estimate2

</th>

<th style="text-align:right;">

statistic

</th>

<th style="text-align:right;">

p.value

</th>

<th style="text-align:right;">

parameter

</th>

<th style="text-align:right;">

conf.low

</th>

<th style="text-align:right;">

conf.high

</th>

<th style="text-align:left;">

method

</th>

<th style="text-align:left;">

alternative

</th>

</tr>

</thead>

<tbody>

<tr>

<td style="text-align:right;">

\-23615.96

</td>

<td style="text-align:right;">

8434.268

</td>

<td style="text-align:right;">

32050.23

</td>

<td style="text-align:right;">

\-32.75189

</td>

<td style="text-align:right;">

0

</td>

<td style="text-align:right;">

311.8511

</td>

<td style="text-align:right;">

\-25034.71

</td>

<td style="text-align:right;">

\-22197.21

</td>

<td style="text-align:left;">

Welch Two Sample t-test

</td>

<td style="text-align:left;">

two.sided

</td>

</tr>

</tbody>

</table>

The exact p-value is
![5.8894644\\times 10^{-103}](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?5.8894644%5Ctimes%2010%5E%7B-103%7D
"5.8894644\\times 10^{-103}") which is very close to 0. However, while
rendering the output to the table above it treats it as 0.

As, we can observe that the p-values is less than the significance level
of ![5\\%](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?5%5C%25 "5\\%") hence,
we can reject ![H\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?H_0 "H_0")
hypothesis and conclude that we have enough evidence to say mean
expenses between smoker and no-smokers is not
same.

##### 2\. Is there a significant difference of expenses between males and females?

  
![H\_0: \\mu\_{Males} =
\\mu\_{Females}](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?H_0%3A%20%5Cmu_%7BMales%7D%20%3D%20%5Cmu_%7BFemales%7D
"H_0: \\mu_{Males} = \\mu_{Females}")  
  
![H\_1: \\mu\_{Males} \\neq
\\mu\_{Females}](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?H_1%3A%20%5Cmu_%7BMales%7D%20%5Cneq%20%5Cmu_%7BFemales%7D
"H_1: \\mu_{Males} \\neq \\mu_{Females}")  

Our Null hypothesis states that mean expenses of males is equal to mean
expenses of females and Alternate hypothesis states that there is a
significant difference between these two quantities. We have used t-test
to compare mean of two groups and test results are as following:

<table>

<thead>

<tr>

<th style="text-align:right;">

estimate

</th>

<th style="text-align:right;">

estimate1

</th>

<th style="text-align:right;">

estimate2

</th>

<th style="text-align:right;">

statistic

</th>

<th style="text-align:right;">

p.value

</th>

<th style="text-align:right;">

parameter

</th>

<th style="text-align:right;">

conf.low

</th>

<th style="text-align:right;">

conf.high

</th>

<th style="text-align:left;">

method

</th>

<th style="text-align:left;">

alternative

</th>

</tr>

</thead>

<tbody>

<tr>

<td style="text-align:right;">

\-1387.172

</td>

<td style="text-align:right;">

12569.58

</td>

<td style="text-align:right;">

13956.75

</td>

<td style="text-align:right;">

\-2.100888

</td>

<td style="text-align:right;">

0.035841

</td>

<td style="text-align:right;">

1313.36

</td>

<td style="text-align:right;">

\-2682.489

</td>

<td style="text-align:right;">

\-91.85535

</td>

<td style="text-align:left;">

Welch Two Sample t-test

</td>

<td style="text-align:left;">

two.sided

</td>

</tr>

</tbody>

</table>

The exact p-value is
![0.035841](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?0.035841 "0.035841")
which is less than the significance level of
![5\\%](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?5%5C%25 "5\\%") hence, we
can reject ![H\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?H_0 "H_0")
hypothesis and conclude that we have enough evidence to say mean
expenses between Males and Females is not same.

# Build a predictive model

  - description
  - model selection
  - hyper-parameter tuning

# Evaluate the predictive model

  - model evaluation on train and test
  - results
  - regression plots

# References

<div id="refs" class="references">

<div id="ref-source">

Lantz, Brett. 2013. *Machine Learning with R*. PACKT Publishing.

</div>

</div>
